Bloomberg News The Supreme Court on Monday ordered a temporary stop to same-sex marriages in Utah while the state appeals a ruling last month that allowed the unions. The high court’s action, announced in a brief written order, comes after hundreds of same-sex couples have married in Utah since a Dec. 20 trial court ruling struck down state laws that limited marriage to opposite sex couples. U.S. District Judge Robert Shelby ruled that Utah’s marriage restrictions violated the equal-protection and due-process guarantees of the U.S Constitution. He refused to postpone the effect of his ruling and the 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals likewise refused to leave Utah’s gay-marriage ban in force while the case continued on appeal. Utah then filed an emergency appeal with the Supreme Court on New Year’s Eve, arguing for an immediate halt to the marriages, which it said were an affront to the state’s interests in “being able to define marriage through ordinary democratic channels.” The same-sex couples who challenged Utah’s marriage laws argued in a filing with the Supreme Court that there was no legal justification for halting same-sex marriages now. The couples said the state was suffering no irreparable harm from the marriages. The Supreme Court’s order means Judge Shelby’s ruling is not in force while the state is challenging it on appeal. If Utah loses on appeal at the 10th Circuit, it will likely ask the Supreme Court to intervene. If that happens, the case could squarely present the justices with a key legal question they sidestepped last year: Does the Constitution allow states to continue to limit marriages to unions of a man and a woman? The Supreme Court issued a pair of gay-marriage rulings in June 2013. In one, the court struck down a 1996 federal law that denied federal benefits to lawfully wedded same-sex couples. But in a second case from California, the court declined to rule on that state’s ban on same-sex marriages, deciding the case on procedural issues instead. A lower court had already invalidated the California law.