By Associated Press Doug Mills/The New York Times Obama Calls for Action on Unemployment: The president said Congress should pass legislation that would restore benefits to millions of people who are struggling to find work in an economy that is still recovering from a deep recession. WASHINGTON — Only moments after the Senate advanced an emergency extension of unemployment insurance benefits on Tuesday, President Obama stood on an East Room stage full of people without jobs and defied the traditional logic of White House strategy that normally emphasizes good news over bad. The president, who sought to dramatize the need for Congress to extend the benefits, delivered what amounts to his broader economic message for 2014: Despite an improving economy, too many people are being left behind. The tableau demonstrated the challenge for Mr. Obama as he seeks to advertise the financial recovery while arguing for action to help a still-besieged middle class. “Our businesses have created more than eight million new jobs since we hit bottom,” Mr. Obama said while somber-looking unemployed Americans, invited to the event by the White House, served as his backdrop. “America’s getting stronger and we’ve made progress.” But the president quickly added that “we’ve got to do more to make sure that all Americans share in that growth” and warned that “there are still a lot of people who are struggling.” A short time before Mr. Obama spoke, the Senate voted to move forward on the extension of the unemployment benefits, winning the votes of six Republicans to overcome a filibuster by a vote of 60-37. The bill still faces debate, negotiation and another vote in the Senate before possibly moving on to the House. In arguing against the unemployment legislation, some Republican lawmakers found themselves arguing against their own political story line that Mr. Obama’s economy was still anemic. Instead, they said that the nation’s financial straits had improved to the point that an emergency extension of the benefits was no longer justified. In 2008, Senator John McCain of Arizona, then the Republican presidential nominee, tripped over a similar rhetorical challenge when he said at a rally that “the fundamentals of our economy are strong” but added immediately that “these are very, very difficult times.” Mr. Obama, then Mr. McCain’s opponent, seized on the phrase that the American economy was fundamentally strong and rode it to the White House. Now it is the president who must find a way to navigate a complex economy. White House officials say that Mr. Obama intends to focus this year on trying to narrow the gap between the rich — who have profited from rising incomes, increasing home values and a 30 percent gain in the stock market — and everyone else. To do that, Mr. Obama plans to campaign in 2014 for universal preschool, an increase in the minimum wage and an administration effort to make college less expensive for the middle class. That approach, which White House officials have foreshadowed for weeks, is rooted in statistics that are at best mixed for Mr. Obama. He is presiding over an economy that has improved sharply in the five years since 2009, when it was buckling under the weight of a severe recession, but decades-long shifts in technology and globalization have left more people out of work for extended periods than at any other time in the past 50 years. Like Mr. Obama, President Ronald Reagan also ended his fifth year with unemployment at 7 percent after a devastating recession. But Mr. Reagan was sunnier in public as the country’s financial fortunes turned around, and ran for re-election in 1984 with an advertising campaign that declared “It’s morning again in America” for a country weary of economic distress. Mr. Obama has chosen to be more restrained in his enthusiasm. “There is a reality in politics, as in life, that you have to play the hand you are dealt,” said Geoff Garin, a veteran Democratic pollster. “The question comes down to whether you think Americans have a capacity for nuance. President Obama has always operated on the presumption that they do, and that is the approach he is taking now in talking about the economy.”