Dieudonné speaks to the media at the theatre in Paris where he was due to perform. Photograph: Michel Euler/AP The French comedian Dieudonné, accused of antisemitism and hate speech, is to unveil a new routine on Sunday night after backing down in the face of determined action by judicial authorities to ban his one-man shows across France.The controversial comedian announced he was cancelling his show The Wall at a press conference on Saturday at the Paris theatre where he was due to perform. Speaking after the top French administrative court, the council of state, banned his shows in Nantes, Tours and Orleans, he promised to "spring back" with a new set focusing on Africa. It promises music, mime "and some tai chi movements".Saying he would "respect the law", Dieudonné – whose father is originally from Cameroon – said the new show, put together in three days, was inspired by "ancestral myths and primitive beliefs". The Journal du Dimanche weekly newspaper described Dieudonné's move as a "tactical retreat".The interior minister, Manuel Valls, vowed to pursue the comedian through the courts over his shows for their antisemitic content. A ruling by the council of state on Thursday, shortly before Dieudonné embarked on his nationwide tour in Nantes, overturned a decision earlier in the day by a lower court which authorised the show. But the bans triggered a furious debate in France over freedom of speech and led to a spike in the comedian's popularity. His trademark gesture known as the quenelle, which is seen by many as a reverse Nazi salute, was widely shared by his supporters online.Valls has said that he is considering legal constraints of Dieudonné's appearances online, which have been viewed by more than 2m people.About 100 supporters of the comedian gathered outside the Théâtre de la Main d'Or in Paris before his press conference, shouting "Valls resign" and "Dieudo for president". The comedian, who denies he is antisemitic, and describes the quenelle as an anti-establishment salute, has called for an anti-government demonstration in Paris on 26 January.Dieudonné, who is known by his first name, has been fined a total €65,000 (£54,000) stemming from nine convictions of hate speech in his shows. Valls launched his campaign against the comedian after Dieudonné suggested a Jewish French journalist should be put to death in a gas chamber.